Previously, we discussed how to store
different data types in variables.
Now we'll begin to move into
the concept of automation, so
we can create exciting actions with code.
Automation is the use of
technology to reduce human and
manual effort to perform common and
repetitive tasks.
It allows computers to do these
tasks for us
so that we may get back more time in
our lives to do other activities.
Conditional statements are important for
automation.
A conditional statement is
a statement that evaluates code
to determine if it meets
a specified set of conditions.
The keyword if is important
in conditional statements.
if starts a conditional statement.
After this keyword,
we then specify the condition that must
be met and what will happen if it is.
We use if statements every day.
For example, if it's cold outside,
then we'll wear a jacket. Or
if it's raining, we'll bring an umbrella.
if statements are structured with
the condition we want to evaluate and
the action that Python will
perform if this condition is met.
Python always evaluates if
the condition is True or False, and
if it's True,
it performs the specific action.
Let's explore an example of this.
We'll instruct Python to print an "account
locked" message anytime the failed log-in
attempts are greater than five.
Our keyword if tells Python to start
a conditional statement. After this,
we indicate the condition
we want to check for.
In this case, we're checking if the user
has more than five failed log-in attempts.
Notice how we're using a variable
called failed_attempts.
In our complete code,
we will have assigned a value to
failed_attempts prior to this if a statement.
After this condition,
we always place a colon.
This signals that what follows is what we
want to happen when the condition is met.
In this case, when the user has more
than five failed log-in attempts,
it prints a message that
the account is locked.
In Python,
this message should always be indented
at least one space in order to execute
only when the condition is true.
It's common to call this first line
the "header" and
to call the actions that happen when
the condition is met the "body."
This condition was based on a variable
being greater than a specific number,
but we can define our condition
using a variety of operators.
For example, we can also check
if something is "less than"
a specified value, or
we can check if it's "greater than" or
"equal to" or "less than or
equal to" the value.
We can also compare if
something is equal to a value.
When we do this inside a conditional,
we need to use a special syntax.
It's not just the equals sign,
but a double equals.
The double equals sign is an important
operator often used in conditional
statements.
A double equals evaluates
whether two objects match.
It assigns a Boolean value of True when
they match and False when they don't.
There's one more operator we should
discuss. An exclamation mark
followed by an equals sign represents
the condition of "not equal."
This operator for "not equal" evaluates
whether two objects are different.
It assigns a Boolean value of True
when they don't match and
False when they match.
Let's more closely investigate an example
that uses the double equals sign.
We'll focus on an example that prints an
"updates needed" message when a particular
operating system is running.
Here, we've created a condition
that checks if a device's operating
system matches a specific string that
identifies this operating system.
To do this, we'll need to use
the double equals sign in our condition.
When it matches, our program will print
a message that there are updates needed.
The operating_system variable is on
the left of the double equals sign.
The string "OS 2" is on the right.
If the condition evaluates to True,
it performs the action that is
indented in the next line of code.
Here, if the operating_system is OS 2,
it will print "updates needed."
If it's False, the message will not print.
Notice how this line is indented.
This tells Python that
the task depends on the if
statement evaluating to True.
Now let's write code that incorporates
this conditional and get the results.
Before we write the conditional statement,
we need to assign a value to
our operating system variable.
We'll make this value the same as
the operating system that we'll check for
in the conditional.
Next, we'll write the condition for
our if statement and use the double
equals sign to check if the
operating_system variable is equivalent to OS 2.
Now we'll type the action that we'll
execute if the condition on the previous
line evaluates to True.
We'll tell Python to print
an "updates needed" message.
Since we set our operating_system variable
to OS 2, the print statement will execute.
Okay, let's run this.
As expected, it printed
"updates needed" because the value
assigned to the operating_system
variable was equal to OS 2.
Sometimes, we want our conditional
statements to execute another
set of instructions in the event
our first condition isn't True.
In our example, not being True
means that the device is running
an operating system other than OS 2.
This is when we need to incorporate
the else keyword into our
conditional statements.
else precedes a code section that only
evaluates when all conditions that
precede it within the conditional
statement evaluate to False.
else statements always follow
an if statement and end in a colon.
Let's use our previous conditional and
add an else statement to it.
We've included the same if statement,
but this time,
we set the operating system variable
to contain a different operating system,
OS 3.
Because this doesn't match
the value in the condition of
the if statement,
the "updates needed" message won't print.
But we can add an else statement and
tell it to do something else instead.
We type the else keyword followed by
a colon.Then we indent the next line
and tell it to print a "no
updates needed" message.
When we'd run this code, it processes
the else statement after the if statement.
Since our if statement
will evaluate to False,
it then moves on to the "else" instruction.
Let's try it.
As expected, it only prints the message
"no updates needed."
Great work! Now we've covered how
to use if and how to use else.
Using conditional statements allows you
to incorporate logic into your code.